Online edition (c) 2009 Cambridge UP
          DRAFT! © April 1, 2009 Cambridge University Press. Feedback welcome.         109




     6    Scoring, term weighting and the
          vector space model



          Thus far we have dealt with indexes that support Boolean queries: a docu-
          ment either matches or does not match a query. In the case of large document
          collections, the resulting number of matching documents can far exceed the
          number a human user could possibly sift through. Accordingly, it is essen-
          tial for a search engine to rank-order the documents matching a query. To do
          this, the search engine computes, for each matching document, a score with
          respect to the query at hand. In this chapter we initiate the study of assigning
          a score to a (query, document) pair. This chapter consists of three main ideas.
          1. We introduce parametric and zone indexes in Section 6.1, which serve
             two purposes. First, they allow us to index and retrieve documents by
             metadata such as the language in which a document is written. Second,
             they give us a simple means for scoring (and thereby ranking) documents
             in response to a query.
          2. Next, in Section 6.2 we develop the idea of weighting the importance of a
             term in a document, based on the statistics of occurrence of the term.
          3. In Section 6.3 we show that by viewing each document as a vector of such
             weights, we can compute a score between a query and each document.
             This view is known as vector space scoring.
          Section 6.4 develops several variants of term-weighting for the vector space
          model. Chapter 7 develops computational aspects of vector space scoring,
          and related topics.
            As we develop these ideas, the notion of a query will assume multiple
          nuances. In Section 6.1 we consider queries in which specific query terms
          occur in specified regions of a matching document. Beginning Section 6.2 we
          will in fact relax the requirement of matching specific regions of a document;
          instead, we will look at so-called free text queries that simply consist of query
          terms with no specification on their relative order, importance or where in a
          document they should be found. The bulk of our study of scoring will be in
          this latter notion of a query being such a set of terms.




Online edition (c) 2009 Cambridge UP
110                                                   6 Scoring, term weighting and the vector space model


               6.1    Parametric and zone indexes


                      We have thus far viewed a document as a sequence of terms. In fact, most
                      documents have additional structure. Digital documents generally encode,
          METADATA    in machine-recognizable form, certain metadata associated with each docu-
                      ment. By metadata, we mean specific forms of data about a document, such
                      as its author(s), title and date of publication. This metadata would generally
              FIELD   include fields such as the date of creation and the format of the document, as
                      well the author and possibly the title of the document. The possible values
                      of a field should be thought of as finite – for instance, the set of all dates of
                      authorship.
                         Consider queries of the form “find documents authored by William Shake-
                      speare in 1601, containing the phrase alas poor Yorick”. Query processing then
                      consists as usual of postings intersections, except that we may merge post-
  PARAMETRIC INDEX    ings from standard inverted as well as parametric indexes. There is one para-
                      metric index for each field (say, date of creation); it allows us to select only
                      the documents matching a date specified in the query. Figure 6.1 illustrates
                      the user’s view of such a parametric search. Some of the fields may assume
                      ordered values, such as dates; in the example query above, the year 1601 is
                      one such field value. The search engine may support querying ranges on
                      such ordered values; to this end, a structure like a B-tree may be used for the
                      field’s dictionary.
              ZONE       Zones are similar to fields, except the contents of a zone can be arbitrary
                      free text. Whereas a field may take on a relatively small set of values, a zone
                      can be thought of as an arbitrary, unbounded amount of text. For instance,
                      document titles and abstracts are generally treated as zones. We may build a
                      separate inverted index for each zone of a document, to support queries such
                      as “find documents with merchant in the title and william in the author list and
                      the phrase gentle rain in the body”. This has the effect of building an index
                      that looks like Figure 6.2. Whereas the dictionary for a parametric index
                      comes from a fixed vocabulary (the set of languages, or the set of dates), the
                      dictionary for a zone index must structure whatever vocabulary stems from
                      the text of that zone.
                         In fact, we can reduce the size of the dictionary by encoding the zone in
                      which a term occurs in the postings. In Figure 6.3 for instance, we show how
                      occurrences of william in the title and author zones of various documents are
                      encoded. Such an encoding is useful when the size of the dictionary is a
                      concern (because we require the dictionary to fit in main memory). But there
                      is another important reason why the encoding of Figure 6.3 is useful: the
      WEIGHTED ZONE   efficient computation of scores using a technique we will call weighted zone
            SCORING   scoring.




 Online edition (c) 2009 Cambridge UP
          6.1 Parametric and zone indexes                                                    111




          ◮ Figure 6.1 Parametric search. In this example we have a collection with fields al-
          lowing us to select publications by zones such as Author and fields such as Language.




          william.abstract    -      11          -   121       -     1441        -     1729


            william.title     -      2           -    4        -       8         -      16


          william.author      -      2           -    3        -       5         -       8



          ◮ Figure 6.2 Basic zone index ; zones are encoded as extensions of dictionary en-
          tries.


             william        - 2.author,2.title   - 3.author      -     4.title     - 5.author




          ◮ Figure 6.3 Zone index in which the zone is encoded in the postings rather than
          the dictionary.




Online edition (c) 2009 Cambridge UP
112                                                         6 Scoring, term weighting and the vector space model


                6.1.1    Weighted zone scoring
                         Thus far in Section 6.1 we have focused on retrieving documents based on
                         Boolean queries on fields and zones. We now turn to a second application of
                         zones and fields.
                            Given a Boolean query q and a document d, weighted zone scoring assigns
                         to the pair (q, d) a score in the interval [0, 1], by computing a linear combina-
                         tion of zone scores, where each zone of the document contributes a Boolean
                         value. More specifically, consider a set of documents each of which has ℓ
                         zones. Let g1 , . . . , gℓ ∈ [0, 1] such that ∑ℓi=1 gi = 1. For 1 ≤ i ≤ ℓ, let si be the
                         Boolean score denoting a match (or absence thereof) between q and the ith
                         zone. For instance, the Boolean score from a zone could be 1 if all the query
                         term(s) occur in that zone, and zero otherwise; indeed, it could be any Boo-
                         lean function that maps the presence of query terms in a zone to 0, 1. Then,
                         the weighted zone score is defined to be
                                                                  ℓ
                 (6.1)                                           ∑ gi si .
                                                                 i =1

      R ANKED B OOLEAN   Weighted zone scoring is sometimes referred to also as ranked Boolean re-
             RETRIEVAL   trieval.


               ✎         Example 6.1:         Consider the query shakespeare in a collection in which each doc-
                         ument has three zones: author, title and body. The Boolean score function for a zone
                         takes on the value 1 if the query term shakespeare is present in the zone, and zero
                         otherwise. Weighted zone scoring in such a collection would require three weights
                         g1 , g2 and g3 , respectively corresponding to the author, title and body zones. Suppose
                         we set g1 = 0.2, g2 = 0.3 and g3 = 0.5 (so that the three weights add up to 1); this cor-
                         responds to an application in which a match in the author zone is least important to
                         the overall score, the title zone somewhat more, and the body contributes even more.
                             Thus if the term shakespeare were to appear in the title and body zones but not the
                         author zone of a document, the score of this document would be 0.8.

                           How do we implement the computation of weighted zone scores? A sim-
                         ple approach would be to compute the score for each document in turn,
                         adding in all the contributions from the various zones. However, we now
                         show how we may compute weighted zone scores directly from inverted in-
                         dexes. The algorithm of Figure 6.4 treats the case when the query q is a two-
                         term query consisting of query terms q1 and q2 , and the Boolean function is
                         AND: 1 if both query terms are present in a zone and 0 otherwise. Following
                         the description of the algorithm, we describe the extension to more complex
                         queries and Boolean functions.
                           The reader may have noticed the close similarity between this algorithm
                         and that in Figure 1.6. Indeed, they represent the same postings traversal,
                         except that instead of merely adding a document to the set of results for




 Online edition (c) 2009 Cambridge UP
                    6.1 Parametric and zone indexes                                             113


                    Z ONE S CORE (q1 , q2 )
                      1 float scores[ N ] = [0]
                      2 constant g[ℓ]
                      3 p1 ← postings(q1 )
                      4 p2 ← postings(q2 )
                      5 // scores[] is an array with a score entry for each document, initialized to zero.
                      6 //p1 and p2 are initialized to point to the beginning of their respective postings.
                      7 //Assume g[] is initialized to the respective zone weights.
                      8 while p1 6= NIL and p2 6= NIL
                      9 do if docID ( p1) = docID ( p2)
                    10        then scores[docID ( p1 )] ← W EIGHTED Z ONE ( p1, p2 , g)
                    11               p1 ← next( p1 )
                    12               p2 ← next( p2 )
                    13        else if docID ( p1) < docID ( p2)
                    14                  then p1 ← next( p1 )
                    15                  else p2 ← next( p2 )
                    16 return scores


                    ◮ Figure 6.4 Algorithm for computing the weighted zone score from two postings
                    lists. Function W EIGHTED Z ONE (not shown here) is assumed to compute the inner
                    loop of Equation 6.1.


                    a Boolean AND query, we now compute a score for each such document.
   ACCUMULATOR      Some literature refers to the array scores[] above as a set of accumulators. The
                    reason for this will be clear as we consider more complex Boolean functions
                    than the AND; thus we may assign a non-zero score to a document even if it
                    does not contain all query terms.

           6.1.2    Learning weights
                    How do we determine the weights gi for weighted zone scoring? These
                    weights could be specified by an expert (or, in principle, the user); but in-
                    creasingly, these weights are “learned” using training examples that have
                    been judged editorially. This latter methodology falls under a general class
                    of approaches to scoring and ranking in information retrieval, known as
MACHINE - LEARNED   machine-learned relevance. We provide a brief introduction to this topic here
      RELEVANCE     because weighted zone scoring presents a clean setting for introducing it; a
                    complete development demands an understanding of machine learning and
                    is deferred to Chapter 15.

                    1. We are provided with a set of training examples, each of which is a tu-
                       ple consisting of a query q and a document d, together with a relevance




Online edition (c) 2009 Cambridge UP
114                                                    6 Scoring, term weighting and the vector space model


                  judgment for d on q. In the simplest form, each relevance judgments is ei-
                  ther Relevant or Non-relevant. More sophisticated implementations of the
                  methodology make use of more nuanced judgments.

               2. The weights gi are then “learned” from these examples, in order that the
                  learned scores approximate the relevance judgments in the training exam-
                  ples.

                  For weighted zone scoring, the process may be viewed as learning a lin-
               ear function of the Boolean match scores contributed by the various zones.
               The expensive component of this methodology is the labor-intensive assem-
               bly of user-generated relevance judgments from which to learn the weights,
               especially in a collection that changes frequently (such as the Web). We now
               detail a simple example that illustrates how we can reduce the problem of
               learning the weights gi to a simple optimization problem.
                  We now consider a simple case of weighted zone scoring, where each doc-
               ument has a title zone and a body zone. Given a query q and a document d, we
               use the given Boolean match function to compute Boolean variables s T (d, q)
               and s B (d, q), depending on whether the title (respectively, body) zone of d
               matches query q. For instance, the algorithm in Figure 6.4 uses an AND of
               the query terms for this Boolean function. We will compute a score between
               0 and 1 for each (document, query) pair using s T (d, q) and s B (d, q) by using
               a constant g ∈ [0, 1], as follows:

       (6.2)                        score(d, q) = g · s T (d, q) + (1 − g)s B (d, q).

               We now describe how to determine the constant g from a set of training ex-
               amples, each of which is a triple of the form Φ j = (d j , q j , r (d j , q j )). In each
               training example, a given training document d j and a given training query q j
               are assessed by a human editor who delivers a relevance judgment r (d j , q j )
               that is either Relevant or Non-relevant. This is illustrated in Figure 6.5, where
               seven training examples are shown.
                  For each training example Φ j we have Boolean values s T (d j , q j ) and s B (d j , q j )
               that we use to compute a score from (6.2)

       (6.3)                     score(d j , q j ) = g · s T (d j , q j ) + (1 − g)s B (d j , q j ).

               We now compare this computed score to the human relevance judgment for
               the same document-query pair (d j , q j ); to this end, we will quantize each
               Relevant judgment as a 1 and each Non-relevant judgment as a 0. Suppose
               that we define the error of the scoring function with weight g as

                                        ε( g, Φ j ) = (r (d j , q j ) − score(d j , q j ))2 ,




 Online edition (c) 2009 Cambridge UP
              6.1 Parametric and zone indexes                                                      115


                          Example       DocID      Query         sT     sB   Judgment
                            Φ1             37      linux          1      1   Relevant
                            Φ2             37      penguin        0      1   Non-relevant
                            Φ3            238      system         0      1   Relevant
                            Φ4            238      penguin        0      0   Non-relevant
                            Φ5           1741      kernel         1      1   Relevant
                            Φ6           2094      driver         0      1   Relevant
                            Φ7           3191      driver         1      0   Non-relevant

              ◮ Figure 6.5 An illustration of training examples.

                                                 sT        sB   Score
                                                  0         0     0
                                                  0         1   1−g
                                                  1         0     g
                                                  1         1     1

              ◮ Figure 6.6 The four possible combinations of s T and s B .



              where we have quantized the editorial relevance judgment r (d j , q j ) to 0 or 1.
              Then, the total error of a set of training examples is given by

      (6.4)                                           ∑ ε( g, Φ j ).
                                                       j

              The problem of learning the constant g from the given training examples
              then reduces to picking the value of g that minimizes the total error in (6.4).
                Picking the best value of g in (6.4) in the formulation of Section 6.1.3 re-
              duces to the problem of minimizing a quadratic function of g over the inter-
              val [0, 1]. This reduction is detailed in Section 6.1.3.



 ✄    6.1.3   The optimal weight g
              We begin by noting that for any training example Φ j for which s T (d j , q j ) = 0
              and s B (d j , q j ) = 1, the score computed by Equation (6.2) is 1 − g. In similar
              fashion, we may write down the score computed by Equation (6.2) for the
              three other possible combinations of s T (d j , q j ) and s B (d j , q j ); this is summa-
              rized in Figure 6.6.
                 Let n01r (respectively, n01n ) denote the number of training examples for
              which s T (d j , q j ) = 0 and s B (d j , q j ) = 1 and the editorial judgment is Relevant
              (respectively, Non-relevant). Then the contribution to the total error in Equa-
              tion (6.4) from training examples for which s T (d j , q j ) = 0 and s B (d j , q j ) = 1




Online edition (c) 2009 Cambridge UP
116                                                 6 Scoring, term weighting and the vector space model


               is
                                      [1 − (1 − g)]2 n01r + [0 − (1 − g)]2 n01n .

               By writing in similar fashion the error contributions from training examples
               of the other three combinations of values for s T (d j , q j ) and s B (d j , q j ) (and
               extending the notation in the obvious manner), the total error corresponding
               to Equation (6.4) is

       (6.5)                  (n01r + n10n ) g2 + (n10r + n01n )(1 − g)2 + n00r + n11n .

                 By differentiating Equation (6.5) with respect to g and setting the result to
               zero, it follows that the optimal value of g is

                                                     n10r + n01n
       (6.6)                                                            .
                                              n10r + n10n + n01r + n01n



       ?
               Exercise 6.1
               When using weighted zone scoring, is it necessary for all zones to use the same Boo-
               lean match function?

               Exercise 6.2
               In Example 6.1 above with weights g1 = 0.2, g2 = 0.31 and g3 = 0.49, what are all the
               distinct score values a document may get?

               Exercise 6.3
               Rewrite the algorithm in Figure 6.4 to the case of more than two query terms.

               Exercise 6.4
               Write pseudocode for the function WeightedZone for the case of two postings lists in
               Figure 6.4.

               Exercise 6.5
               Apply Equation 6.6 to the sample training set in Figure 6.5 to estimate the best value
               of g for this sample.

               Exercise 6.6
               For the value of g estimated in Exercise 6.5, compute the weighted zone score for each
               (query, document) example. How do these scores relate to the relevance judgments
               in Figure 6.5 (quantized to 0/1)?

               Exercise 6.7
               Why does the expression for g in (6.6) not involve training examples in which s T (dt , q t )
               and s B (dt , q t ) have the same value?




 Online edition (c) 2009 Cambridge UP
                  6.2 Term frequency and weighting                                           117


           6.2    Term frequency and weighting
                  Thus far, scoring has hinged on whether or not a query term is present in
                  a zone within a document. We take the next logical step: a document or
                  zone that mentions a query term more often has more to do with that query
                  and therefore should receive a higher score. To motivate this, we recall the
                  notion of a free text query introduced in Section 1.4: a query in which the
                  terms of the query are typed freeform into the search interface, without any
                  connecting search operators (such as Boolean operators). This query style,
                  which is extremely popular on the web, views the query as simply a set of
                  words. A plausible scoring mechanism then is to compute a score that is the
                  sum, over the query terms, of the match scores between each query term and
                  the document.
                     Towards this end, we assign to each term in a document a weight for that
                  term, that depends on the number of occurrences of the term in the doc-
                  ument. We would like to compute a score between a query term t and a
                  document d, based on the weight of t in d. The simplest approach is to assign
                  the weight to be equal to the number of occurrences of term t in document d.
 TERM FREQUENCY   This weighting scheme is referred to as term frequency and is denoted tft,d ,
                  with the subscripts denoting the term and the document in order.
                     For a document d, the set of weights determined by the tf weights above
                  (or indeed any weighting function that maps the number of occurrences of t
                  in d to a positive real value) may be viewed as a quantitative digest of that
   BAG OF WORDS   document. In this view of a document, known in the literature as the bag
                  of words model, the exact ordering of the terms in a document is ignored but
                  the number of occurrences of each term is material (in contrast to Boolean
                  retrieval). We only retain information on the number of occurrences of each
                  term. Thus, the document “Mary is quicker than John” is, in this view, iden-
                  tical to the document “John is quicker than Mary”. Nevertheless, it seems
                  intuitive that two documents with similar bag of words representations are
                  similar in content. We will develop this intuition further in Section 6.3.
                     Before doing so we first study the question: are all words in a document
                  equally important? Clearly not; in Section 2.2.2 (page 27) we looked at the
                  idea of stop words – words that we decide not to index at all, and therefore do
                  not contribute in any way to retrieval and scoring.

          6.2.1   Inverse document frequency
                  Raw term frequency as above suffers from a critical problem: all terms are
                  considered equally important when it comes to assessing relevancy on a
                  query. In fact certain terms have little or no discriminating power in de-
                  termining relevance. For instance, a collection of documents on the auto
                  industry is likely to have the term auto in almost every document. To this




Online edition (c) 2009 Cambridge UP
118                                                   6 Scoring, term weighting and the vector space model


                                                Word          cf           df
                                                try           10422        8760
                                                insurance     10440        3997

                     ◮ Figure 6.7 Collection frequency (cf) and document frequency (df) behave differ-
                     ently, as in this example from the Reuters collection.



                     end, we introduce a mechanism for attenuating the effect of terms that occur
                     too often in the collection to be meaningful for relevance determination. An
                     immediate idea is to scale down the term weights of terms with high collec-
                     tion frequency, defined to be the total number of occurrences of a term in the
                     collection. The idea would be to reduce the tf weight of a term by a factor
                     that grows with its collection frequency.
        DOCUMENT        Instead, it is more commonplace to use for this purpose the document fre-
        FREQUENCY    quency dft , defined to be the number of documents in the collection that con-
                     tain a term t. This is because in trying to discriminate between documents
                     for the purpose of scoring it is better to use a document-level statistic (such
                     as the number of documents containing a term) than to use a collection-wide
                     statistic for the term. The reason to prefer df to cf is illustrated in Figure 6.7,
                     where a simple example shows that collection frequency (cf) and document
                     frequency (df) can behave rather differently. In particular, the cf values for
                     both try and insurance are roughly equal, but their df values differ signifi-
                     cantly. Intuitively, we want the few documents that contain insurance to get
                     a higher boost for a query on insurance than the many documents containing
                     try get from a query on try.
                        How is the document frequency df of a term used to scale its weight? De-
                     noting as usual the total number of documents in a collection by N, we define
  INVERSE DOCUMENT   the inverse document frequency (idf) of a term t as follows:
         FREQUENCY
                                                                   N
             (6.7)                                    idft = log       .
                                                                   dft
                        Thus the idf of a rare term is high, whereas the idf of a frequent term is
                     likely to be low. Figure 6.8 gives an example of idf’s in the Reuters collection
                     of 806,791 documents; in this example logarithms are to the base 10. In fact,
                     as we will see in Exercise 6.12, the precise base of the logarithm is not material
                     to ranking. We will give on page 227 a justification of the particular form in
                     Equation (6.7).

             6.2.2   Tf-idf weighting
                     We now combine the definitions of term frequency and inverse document
                     frequency, to produce a composite weight for each term in each document.




 Online edition (c) 2009 Cambridge UP
                     6.2 Term frequency and weighting                                              119


                                                 term              dft     idft
                                                 car            18,165     1.65
                                                 auto            6723      2.08
                                                 insurance      19,241     1.62
                                                 best           25,235      1.5

                     ◮ Figure 6.8 Example of idf values. Here we give the idf’s of terms with various
                     frequencies in the Reuters collection of 806,791 documents.



          TF - IDF   The tf-idf weighting scheme assigns to term t a weight in document d given
                     by

           (6.8)                                    tf-idft,d = tft,d × idft .
                       In other words, tf-idft,d assigns to term t a weight in document d that is

                     1. highest when t occurs many times within a small number of documents
                        (thus lending high discriminating power to those documents);

                     2. lower when the term occurs fewer times in a document, or occurs in many
                        documents (thus offering a less pronounced relevance signal);

                     3. lowest when the term occurs in virtually all documents.

DOCUMENT VECTOR         At this point, we may view each document as a vector with one component
                     corresponding to each term in the dictionary, together with a weight for each
                     component that is given by (6.8). For dictionary terms that do not occur in
                     a document, this weight is zero. This vector form will prove to be crucial to
                     scoring and ranking; we will develop these ideas in Section 6.3. As a first
                     step, we introduce the overlap score measure: the score of a document d is the
                     sum, over all query terms, of the number of times each of the query terms
                     occurs in d. We can refine this idea so that we add up not the number of
                     occurrences of each query term t in d, but instead the tf-idf weight of each
                     term in d.
           (6.9)                                Score(q, d) = ∑ tf-idft,d .
                                                                  t∈q

                     In Section 6.3 we will develop a more rigorous form of Equation (6.9).

            ?
                     Exercise 6.8
                     Why is the idf of a term always finite?

                     Exercise 6.9
                     What is the idf of a term that occurs in every document? Compare this with the use
                     of stop word lists.




Online edition (c) 2009 Cambridge UP
120                                                     6 Scoring, term weighting and the vector space model


                                                            Doc1     Doc2     Doc3
                                              car             27        4       24
                                              auto             3       33        0
                                              insurance        0       33       29
                                              best            14        0       17

                     ◮ Figure 6.9 Table of tf values for Exercise 6.10.



                     Exercise 6.10
                     Consider the table of term frequencies for 3 documents denoted Doc1, Doc2, Doc3 in
                     Figure 6.9. Compute the tf-idf weights for the terms car, auto, insurance, best, for each
                     document, using the idf values from Figure 6.8.
                     Exercise 6.11
                     Can the tf-idf weight of a term in a document exceed 1?
                     Exercise 6.12
                     How does the base of the logarithm in (6.7) affect the score calculation in (6.9)? How
                     does the base of the logarithm affect the relative scores of two documents on a given
                     query?
                     Exercise 6.13
                     If the logarithm in (6.7) is computed base 2, suggest a simple approximation to the idf
                     of a term.


              6.3    The vector space model for scoring
                     In Section 6.2 (page 117) we developed the notion of a document vector that
                     captures the relative importance of the terms in a document. The representa-
                     tion of a set of documents as vectors in a common vector space is known as
VECTOR SPACE MODEL   the vector space model and is fundamental to a host of information retrieval op-
                     erations ranging from scoring documents on a query, document classification
                     and document clustering. We first develop the basic ideas underlying vector
                     space scoring; a pivotal step in this development is the view (Section 6.3.2)
                     of queries as vectors in the same vector space as the document collection.

             6.3.1   Dot products
                     We denote by V  ~ (d) the vector derived from document d, with one com-
                     ponent in the vector for each dictionary term. Unless otherwise specified,
                     the reader may assume that the components are computed using the tf-idf
                     weighting scheme, although the particular weighting scheme is immaterial
                     to the discussion that follows. The set of documents in a collection then may
                     be viewed as a set of vectors in a vector space, in which there is one axis for




 Online edition (c) 2009 Cambridge UP
                     6.3 The vector space model for scoring                                              121


                                          gossip
                                           1     ~v(d1 )

                                                              ~v(q)
                                                                       ~v(d2 )

                                                      θ


                                                                                 ~v(d3 )
                                           0
                                                                                    jealous
                                               0                                 1

                     ◮ Figure 6.10 Cosine similarity illustrated. sim(d1 , d2 ) = cos θ.



                     each term. This representation loses the relative ordering of the terms in each
                     document; recall our example from Section 6.2 (page 117), where we pointed
                     out that the documents Mary is quicker than John and John is quicker than Mary
                     are identical in such a bag of words representation.
                        How do we quantify the similarity between two documents in this vector
                     space? A first attempt might consider the magnitude of the vector difference
                     between two document vectors. This measure suffers from a drawback: two
                     documents with very similar content can have a significant vector difference
                     simply because one is much longer than the other. Thus the relative distribu-
                     tions of terms may be identical in the two documents, but the absolute term
                     frequencies of one may be far larger.
                        To compensate for the effect of document length, the standard way of
                     quantifying the similarity between two documents d1 and d2 is to compute
 COSINE SIMILARITY                                                         ~ (d1 ) and V
                     the cosine similarity of their vector representations V           ~ ( d2 )

                                                                  ~ ( d1 ) · V
                                                                  V          ~ ( d2 )
            (6.10)                             sim(d1 , d2 ) =                        ,
                                                                  ~ (d1 )||V
                                                                 |V          ~ (d2 )|

     DOT PRODUCT     where the numerator represents the dot product (also known as the inner prod-
                     uct) of the vectors ~    V (d1 ) and ~
                                                          V (d2 ), while the denominator is the product of
E UCLIDEAN LENGTH    their Euclidean lengths. The dot product ~x · ~y of two vectors is defined as
                     ∑iM                 ~
                        =1 x i y i . Let V ( d ) denote the document vector for d, withq M components
                     V1 (d) . . . VM (d). The Euclidean length of d is defined to be ∑ M V
                     ~             ~                                                            ~ 2 ( d ).
                                                                                              i =1   i
       LENGTH -        The effect of the denominator of Equation (6.10) is thus to length-normalize
  NORMALIZATION                  ~ (d1 ) and V
                     the vectors V           ~ (d2 ) to unit vectors ~v(d1 ) = V
                                                                               ~ ( d 1 ) / |V
                                                                                            ~ (d1 )| and




Online edition (c) 2009 Cambridge UP
122                                                6 Scoring, term weighting and the vector space model


                                                       Doc1     Doc2      Doc3
                                        car            0.88     0.09      0.58
                                        auto           0.10     0.71      0
                                        insurance      0        0.71      0.70
                                        best           0.46     0         0.41

               ◮ Figure 6.11 Euclidean normalized tf values for documents in Figure 6.9.

                                           term         SaS     PaP     WH
                                           affection    115      58      20
                                           jealous       10       7      11
                                           gossip         2       0       6

               ◮ Figure 6.12 Term frequencies in three novels. The novels are Austen’s Sense and
               Sensibility, Pride and Prejudice and Brontë’s Wuthering Heights.



                         ~ ( d 2 ) / |V
               ~v(d2 ) = V            ~ (d2 )|. We can then rewrite (6.10) as

      (6.11)                               sim(d1 , d2 ) = ~v(d1 ) · ~v(d2 ).



      ✎        Example 6.2:      Consider the documents in Figure 6.9. We now apply Euclidean
               normalization to theq
                                   tf values from the table, for each of the three documents in the
               table. The quantity ∑ M ~  V 2 (d) has the values 30.56, 46.84 and 41.30 respectively
                                        i =1   i
               for Doc1, Doc2 and Doc3. The resulting Euclidean normalized tf values for these
               documents are shown in Figure 6.11.

                  Thus, (6.11) can be viewed as the dot product of the normalized versions of
                the two document vectors. This measure is the cosine of the angle θ between
                the two vectors, shown in Figure 6.10. What use is the similarity measure
                sim(d1 , d2 )? Given a document d (potentially one of the di in the collection),
                consider searching for the documents in the collection most similar to d. Such
                a search is useful in a system where a user may identify a document and
                seek others like it – a feature available in the results lists of search engines
                as a more like this feature. We reduce the problem of finding the document(s)
                most similar to d to that of finding the di with the highest dot products (sim
                values) ~v(d) ·~v(di ). We could do this by computing the dot products between
               ~v(d) and each of ~v(d1 ), . . . , ~v(d N ), then picking off the highest resulting sim
                values.



      ✎        Example 6.3: Figure 6.12 shows the number of occurrences of three terms (affection,
               jealous and gossip) in each of the following three novels: Jane Austen’s Sense and Sensi-
               bility (SaS) and Pride and Prejudice (PaP) and Emily Brontë’s Wuthering Heights (WH).




 Online edition (c) 2009 Cambridge UP
                    6.3 The vector space model for scoring                                               123


                                              term           SaS     PaP     WH
                                              affection      0.996   0.993   0.847
                                              jealous        0.087   0.120   0.466
                                              gossip         0.017   0       0.254

                    ◮ Figure 6.13 Term vectors for the three novels of Figure 6.12. These are based on
                    raw term frequency only and are normalized as if these were the only terms in the
                    collection. (Since affection and jealous occur in all three documents, their tf-idf weight
                    would be 0 in most formulations.)



                    Of course, there are many other terms occurring in each of these novels. In this ex-
                    ample we represent each of these novels as a unit vector in three dimensions, corre-
                    sponding to these three terms (only); we use raw term frequencies here, with no idf
                    multiplier. The resulting weights are as shown in Figure 6.13.
                       Now consider the cosine similarities between pairs of the resulting three-dimensional
                    vectors. A simple computation shows that sim(~v(SAS), ~v(PAP)) is 0.999, whereas
                    sim(~v(SAS), ~v(WH)) is 0.888; thus, the two books authored by Austen (SaS and PaP)
                    are considerably closer to each other than to Brontë’s Wuthering Heights. In fact, the
                    similarity between the first two is almost perfect (when restricted to the three terms
                    we consider). Here we have considered tf weights, but we could of course use other
                    term weight functions.

                       Viewing a collection of N documents as a collection of vectors leads to a
 TERM - DOCUMENT    natural view of a collection as a term-document matrix: this is an M × N matrix
           MATRIX   whose rows represent the M terms (dimensions) of the N columns, each of
                    which corresponds to a document. As always, the terms being indexed could
                    be stemmed before indexing; for instance, jealous and jealousy would under
                    stemming be considered as a single dimension. This matrix view will prove
                    to be useful in Chapter 18.

           6.3.2    Queries as vectors
                    There is a far more compelling reason to represent documents as vectors:
                    we can also view a query as a vector. Consider the query q = jealous gossip.
                    This query turns into the unit vector ~v(q) = (0, 0.707, 0.707) on the three
                    coordinates of Figures 6.12 and 6.13. The key idea now: to assign to each
                    document d a score equal to the dot product

                                                          ~v(q) · ~v(d).

                      In the example of Figure 6.13, Wuthering Heights is the top-scoring docu-
                    ment for this query with a score of 0.509, with Pride and Prejudice a distant
                    second with a score of 0.085, and Sense and Sensibility last with a score of
                    0.074. This simple example is somewhat misleading: the number of dimen-




Online edition (c) 2009 Cambridge UP
124                                                6 Scoring, term weighting and the vector space model


               sions in practice will be far larger than three: it will equal the vocabulary size
               M.
                  To summarize, by viewing a query as a “bag of words”, we are able to
               treat it as a very short document. As a consequence, we can use the cosine
               similarity between the query vector and a document vector as a measure of
               the score of the document for that query. The resulting scores can then be
               used to select the top-scoring documents for a query. Thus we have
                                                             ~ ( q) · V
                                                             V        ~ (d)
      (6.12)                               score(q, d) =                     .
                                                             ~ (q)||V
                                                            |V        ~ (d)|
               A document may have a high cosine score for a query even if it does not
               contain all query terms. Note that the preceding discussion does not hinge
               on any specific weighting of terms in the document vector, although for the
               present we may think of them as either tf or tf-idf weights. In fact, a number
               of weighting schemes are possible for query as well as document vectors, as
               illustrated in Example 6.4 and developed further in Section 6.4.
                  Computing the cosine similarities between the query vector and each doc-
               ument vector in the collection, sorting the resulting scores and selecting the
               top K documents can be expensive — a single similarity computation can
               entail a dot product in tens of thousands of dimensions, demanding tens of
               thousands of arithmetic operations. In Section 7.1 we study how to use an in-
               verted index for this purpose, followed by a series of heuristics for improving
               on this.


      ✎        Example 6.4: We now consider the query best car insurance on a fictitious collection
               with N = 1,000,000 documents where the document frequencies of auto, best, car and
               insurance are respectively 5000, 50000, 10000 and 1000.
                    term                  query                  document        product
                                  tf     df idf wt,q tf wf wt,d
                    auto           0   5000 2.3 0             1 1        0.41 0
                    best           1 50000 1.3 1.3            0 0        0       0
                    car            1 10000 2.0 2.0            1 1        0.41 0.82
                    insurance      1   1000 3.0 3.0           2 2        0.82 2.46
                  In this example the weight of a term in the query is simply the idf (and zero for a
               term not in the query, such as auto); this is reflected in the column header wt,q (the en-
               try for auto is zero because the query does not contain the termauto). For documents,
               we use tf weighting with no use of idf but with Euclidean normalization. The former
               is shown under the column headed wf, while the latter is shown under the column
               headed wt,d . Invoking (6.9) now gives a net score of 0 + 0 + 0.82 + 2.46 = 3.28.


      6.3.3    Computing vector scores
               In a typical setting we have a collection of documents each represented by a
               vector, a free text query represented by a vector, and a positive integer K. We




 Online edition (c) 2009 Cambridge UP
                        6.3 The vector space model for scoring                                      125


                        C OSINE S CORE (q)
                         1 float Scores[ N ] = 0
                         2 Initialize Length[ N ]
                         3 for each query term t
                         4 do calculate wt,q and fetch postings list for t
                         5      for each pair(d, tft,d ) in postings list
                         6      do Scores[d] += wft,d × wt,q
                         7 Read the array Length[d]
                         8 for each d
                         9 do Scores[d] = Scores[d]/Length[d]
                        10 return Top K components of Scores[]


                        ◮ Figure 6.14 The basic algorithm for computing vector space scores.



                        seek the K documents of the collection with the highest vector space scores on
                        the given query. We now initiate the study of determining the K documents
                        with the highest vector space scores for a query. Typically, we seek these
                        K top documents in ordered by decreasing score; for instance many search
                        engines use K = 10 to retrieve and rank-order the first page of the ten best
                        results. Here we give the basic algorithm for this computation; we develop a
                        fuller treatment of efficient techniques and approximations in Chapter 7.
                           Figure 6.14 gives the basic algorithm for computing vector space scores.
                        The array Length holds the lengths (normalization factors) for each of the N
                        documents, whereas the array Scores holds the scores for each of the docu-
                        ments. When the scores are finally computed in Step 9, all that remains in
                        Step 10 is to pick off the K documents with the highest scores.
                           The outermost loop beginning Step 3 repeats the updating of Scores, iter-
                        ating over each query term t in turn. In Step 5 we calculate the weight in
                        the query vector for term t. Steps 6-8 update the score of each document by
                        adding in the contribution from term t. This process of adding in contribu-
  TERM - AT- A - TIME   tions one query term at a time is sometimes known as term-at-a-time scoring
                        or accumulation, and the N elements of the array Scores are therefore known
   ACCUMULATOR          as accumulators. For this purpose, it would appear necessary to store, with
                        each postings entry, the weight wft,d of term t in document d (we have thus
                        far used either tf or tf-idf for this weight, but leave open the possibility of
                        other functions to be developed in Section 6.4). In fact this is wasteful, since
                        storing this weight may require a floating point number. Two ideas help alle-
                        viate this space problem. First, if we are using inverse document frequency,
                        we need not precompute idft ; it suffices to store N/dft at the head of the
                        postings for t. Second, we store the term frequency tft,d for each postings en-
                        try. Finally, Step 12 extracts the top K scores – this requires a priority queue




Online edition (c) 2009 Cambridge UP
126                                                         6 Scoring, term weighting and the vector space model


                         data structure, often implemented using a heap. Such a heap takes no more
                         than 2N comparisons to construct, following which each of the K top scores
                         can be extracted from the heap at a cost of O(log N ) comparisons.
                            Note that the general algorithm of Figure 6.14 does not prescribe a specific
                         implementation of how we traverse the postings lists of the various query
                         terms; we may traverse them one term at a time as in the loop beginning
                         at Step 3, or we could in fact traverse them concurrently as in Figure 1.6. In
                         such a concurrent postings traversal we compute the scores of one document
DOCUMENT- AT- A - TIME   at a time, so that it is sometimes called document-at-a-time scoring. We will
                         say more about this in Section 7.1.5.


                 ?
                         Exercise 6.14
                         If we were to stem jealous and jealousy to a common stem before setting up the vector
                         space, detail how the definitions of tf and idf should be modified.

                         Exercise 6.15
                         Recall the tf-idf weights computed in Exercise 6.10. Compute the Euclidean nor-
                         malized document vectors for each of the documents, where each vector has four
                         components, one for each of the four terms.

                         Exercise 6.16
                         Verify that the sum of the squares of the components of each of the document vectors
                         in Exercise 6.15 is 1 (to within rounding error). Why is this the case?

                         Exercise 6.17
                         With term weights as computed in Exercise 6.15, rank the three documents by com-
                         puted score for the query car insurance, for each of the following cases of term weight-
                         ing in the query:

                         1. The weight of a term is 1 if present in the query, 0 otherwise.
                         2. Euclidean normalized idf.


                 6.4     Variant tf-idf functions
                         For assigning a weight for each term in each document, a number of alterna-
                         tives to tf and tf-idf have been considered. We discuss some of the principal
                         ones here; a more complete development is deferred to Chapter 11. We will
                         summarize these alternatives in Section 6.4.3 (page 128).

                6.4.1    Sublinear tf scaling
                         It seems unlikely that twenty occurrences of a term in a document truly carry
                         twenty times the significance of a single occurrence. Accordingly, there has
                         been considerable research into variants of term frequency that go beyond
                         counting the number of occurrences of a term. A common modification is




 Online edition (c) 2009 Cambridge UP
                6.4 Variant tf-idf functions                                                    127


                to use instead the logarithm of the term frequency, which assigns a weight
                given by
                                            
                                              1 + log tft,d if tft,d > 0
       (6.13)                       wft,d =                              .
                                              0             otherwise
                  In this form, we may replace tf by some other function wf as in (6.13), to
                obtain:
       (6.14)                            wf-idft,d = wft,d × idft .
                Equation (6.9) can then be modified by replacing tf-idf by wf-idf as defined
                in (6.14).

       6.4.2    Maximum tf normalization
                One well-studied technique is to normalize the tf weights of all terms occur-
                ring in a document by the maximum tf in that document. For each document
                d, let tfmax (d) = maxτ ∈d tfτ,d , where τ ranges over all terms in d. Then, we
                compute a normalized term frequency for each term t in document d by
                                                                        tft,d
       (6.15)                                  ntft,d = a + (1 − a)             ,
                                                                      tfmax (d)
                where a is a value between 0 and 1 and is generally set to 0.4, although some
   SMOOTHING    early work used the value 0.5. The term a in (6.15) is a smoothing term whose
                role is to damp the contribution of the second term – which may be viewed as
                a scaling down of tf by the largest tf value in d. We will encounter smoothing
                further in Chapter 13 when discussing classification; the basic idea is to avoid
                a large swing in ntft,d from modest changes in tft,d (say from 1 to 2). The main
                idea of maximum tf normalization is to mitigate the following anomaly: we
                observe higher term frequencies in longer documents, merely because longer
                documents tend to repeat the same words over and over again. To appreciate
                this, consider the following extreme example: supposed we were to take a
                document d and create a new document d′ by simply appending a copy of d
                to itself. While d′ should be no more relevant to any query than d is, the use
                of (6.9) would assign it twice as high a score as d. Replacing tf-idft,d in (6.9) by
                ntf-idft,d eliminates the anomaly in this example. Maximum tf normalization
                does suffer from the following issues:
                1. The method is unstable in the following sense: a change in the stop word
                   list can dramatically alter term weightings (and therefore ranking). Thus,
                   it is hard to tune.
                2. A document may contain an outlier term with an unusually large num-
                   ber of occurrences of that term, not representative of the content of that
                   document.




Online edition (c) 2009 Cambridge UP
128                                                               6 Scoring, term weighting and the vector space model


          Term frequency                                Document frequency                           Normalization
 n (natural)      tft,d                           n (no)      1                         n (none)        1
 l (logarithm)     1 + log(tft,d )                t (idf)        log N                  c (cosine)       √ 2      1
                                                                    dft                                     w1 +w22 +...+w2M
                          0.5×tft,d                                          −dft
 a (augmented)     0.5 +                          p (prob idf)   max{0, log Ndf   }     u (pivoted       1/u (Section 6.4.4)
                         maxt (tft,d )                                          t
                                                                                          unique)
                     1 if tft,d > 0
 b (boolean)                                                                            b (byte size)    1/CharLengthα , α < 1
                     0 otherwise
                          1+log (tft,d )
 L (log ave)           1+log(avet ∈ d (tft,d ))

                            ◮ Figure 6.15 SMART notation for tf-idf variants. Here CharLength is the number
                            of characters in the document.




                            3. More generally, a document in which the most frequent term appears
                               roughly as often as many other terms should be treated differently from
                               one with a more skewed distribution.



               6.4.3        Document and query weighting schemes

                            Equation (6.12) is fundamental to information retrieval systems that use any
                            form of vector space scoring. Variations from one vector space scoring method
                            to another hinge on the specific choices of weights in the vectors V~ (d) and
                            ~
                            V (q). Figure 6.15 lists some of the principal weighting schemes in use for
                            each of V ~ (d) and V~ (q), together with a mnemonic for representing a spe-
                            cific combination of weights; this system of mnemonics is sometimes called
                            SMART notation, following the authors of an early text retrieval system. The
                            mnemonic for representing a combination of weights takes the form ddd.qqq
                            where the first triplet gives the term weighting of the document vector, while
                            the second triplet gives the weighting in the query vector. The first letter in
                            each triplet specifies the term frequency component of the weighting, the
                            second the document frequency component, and the third the form of nor-
                            malization used. It is quite common to apply different normalization func-
                            tions to V ~ (d) and V
                                                 ~ (q). For example, a very standard weighting scheme
                            is lnc.ltc, where the document vector has log-weighted term frequency, no
                            idf (for both effectiveness and efficiency reasons), and cosine normalization,
                            while the query vector uses log-weighted term frequency, idf weighting, and
                            cosine normalization.




 Online edition (c) 2009 Cambridge UP
                   6.4 Variant tf-idf functions                                                  129



 ✄         6.4.4   Pivoted normalized document length

                   In Section 6.3.1 we normalized each document vector by the Euclidean length
                   of the vector, so that all document vectors turned into unit vectors. In doing
                   so, we eliminated all information on the length of the original document;
                   this masks some subtleties about longer documents. First, longer documents
                   will – as a result of containing more terms – have higher tf values. Second,
                   longer documents contain more distinct terms. These factors can conspire to
                   raise the scores of longer documents, which (at least for some information
                   needs) is unnatural. Longer documents can broadly be lumped into two cat-
                   egories: (1) verbose documents that essentially repeat the same content – in
                   these, the length of the document does not alter the relative weights of dif-
                   ferent terms; (2) documents covering multiple different topics, in which the
                   search terms probably match small segments of the document but not all of
                   it – in this case, the relative weights of terms are quite different from a single
                   short document that matches the query terms. Compensating for this phe-
                   nomenon is a form of document length normalization that is independent of
                   term and document frequencies. To this end, we introduce a form of normal-
                   izing the vector representations of documents in the collection, so that the
                   resulting “normalized” documents are not necessarily of unit length. Then,
                   when we compute the dot product score between a (unit) query vector and
                   such a normalized document, the score is skewed to account for the effect
                   of document length on relevance. This form of compensation for document
PIVOTED DOCUMENT   length is known as pivoted document length normalization.
          LENGTH      Consider a document collection together with an ensemble of queries for
   NORMALIZATION
                   that collection. Suppose that we were given, for each query q and for each
                   document d, a Boolean judgment of whether or not d is relevant to the query
                   q; in Chapter 8 we will see how to procure such a set of relevance judgments
                   for a query ensemble and a document collection. Given this set of relevance
                   judgments, we may compute a probability of relevance as a function of docu-
                   ment length, averaged over all queries in the ensemble. The resulting plot
                   may look like the curve drawn in thick lines in Figure 6.16. To compute this
                   curve, we bucket documents by length and compute the fraction of relevant
                   documents in each bucket, then plot this fraction against the median docu-
                   ment length of each bucket. (Thus even though the “curve” in Figure 6.16
                   appears to be continuous, it is in fact a histogram of discrete buckets of doc-
                   ument length.)
                      On the other hand, the curve in thin lines shows what might happen with
                   the same documents and query ensemble if we were to use relevance as pre-
                   scribed by cosine normalization Equation (6.12) – thus, cosine normalization
                   has a tendency to distort the computed relevance vis-à-vis the true relevance,
                   at the expense of longer documents. The thin and thick curves crossover at a
                   point p corresponding to document length ℓ p , which we refer to as the pivot




Online edition (c) 2009 Cambridge UP
130                                             6 Scoring, term weighting and the vector space model




                Relevance
                 6                  
                                  
                                   
                                     
                                
                                 
                             p 
                              
                            
                           
                          
                         
                        
                      
                    
                     
                    
                   
                                         - length
                                    Document
                             ℓp

               ◮ Figure 6.16 Pivoted document length normalization.




               length; dashed lines mark this point on the x − and y− axes. The idea of
               pivoted document length normalization would then be to “rotate” the co-
               sine normalization curve counter-clockwise about p so that it more closely
               matches thick line representing the relevance vs. document length curve.
               As mentioned at the beginning of this section, we do so by using in Equa-
               tion (6.12) a normalization factor for each document vector V   ~ (d) that is not
               the Euclidean length of that vector, but instead one that is larger than the Eu-
               clidean length for documents of length less than ℓ p , and smaller for longer
               documents.
                  To this end, we first note that the normalizing term for V   ~ (d) in the de-
               nominator of Equation (6.12) is its Euclidean length, denoted | ~  V (d)|. In the
               simplest implementation of pivoted document length normalization, we use
               a normalization factor in the denominator that is linear in |V   ~ (d)|, but one
               of slope < 1 as in Figure 6.17. In this figure, the x − axis represents |V ~ (d)|,
               while the y−axis represents possible normalization factors we can use. The
               thin line y = x depicts the use of cosine normalization. Notice the following
               aspects of the thick line representing pivoted length normalization:

               1. It is linear in the document length and has the form

      (6.16)                                     ~ (d)| + (1 − a)piv,
                                              a |V




 Online edition (c) 2009 Cambridge UP
                      6.4 Variant tf-idf functions                                                       131




                 Pivoted normalization
                              6                        y = x; Cosine

                                          Pivoted
                                        
                                       
                                      
                                     
                                    
                                   
                                  
                                 
                                
                               
                              

                                                                                  |~
                                                                                   V (d)|
                                                                              -
                                                     piv

                      ◮ Figure 6.17 Implementing pivoted document length normalization by linear scal-
                      ing.


                         where piv is the cosine normalization value at which the two curves in-
                         tersect.
                      2. Its slope is a < 1 and (3) it crosses the y = x line at piv.
                      It has been argued that in practice, Equation (6.16) is well approximated by

                                                       aud + (1 − a)piv,

                      where ud is the number of unique terms in document d.
                         Of course, pivoted document length normalization is not appropriate for
                      all applications. For instance, in a collection of answers to frequently asked
                      questions (say, at a customer service website), relevance may have little to
                      do with document length. In other cases the dependency may be more com-
                      plex than can be accounted for by a simple linear pivoted normalization. In
                      such cases, document length can be used as a feature in the machine learning
                      based scoring approach of Section 6.1.2.


               ?
                      Exercise 6.18
E UCLIDEAN DISTANCE   One measure of the similarity of two vectors is the Euclidean distance (or L2 distance)
                      between them:                             v
                                                                uM
                                                                u
                                                   |~x − ~y | = t ∑ ( xi − yi )2
                                                                 i =1




Online edition (c) 2009 Cambridge UP
132                                                 6 Scoring, term weighting and the vector space model


                               query                                    document
      word      tf   wf   df       idf      qi = wf-idf     tf   wf     d i = normalized wf       qi · d i
      digital             10,000
      video               100,000
      cameras             50,000

                 ◮ Table 6.1 Cosine computation for Exercise 6.19.




                 Given a query q and documents d1 , d2 , . . ., we may rank the documents di in order
                 of increasing Euclidean distance from q. Show that if q and the di are all normalized
                 to unit vectors, then the rank ordering produced by Euclidean distance is identical to
                 that produced by cosine similarities.

                 Exercise 6.19
                 Compute the vector space similarity between the query “digital cameras” and the
                 document “digital cameras and video cameras” by filling out the empty columns in
                 Table 6.1. Assume N = 10,000,000, logarithmic term weighting (wf columns) for
                 query and document, idf weighting for the query only and cosine normalization for
                 the document only. Treat and as a stop word. Enter term counts in the tf columns.
                 What is the final similarity score?

                 Exercise 6.20
                 Show that for the query affection, the relative ordering of the scores of the three doc-
                 uments in Figure 6.13 is the reverse of the ordering of the scores for the query jealous
                 gossip.

                 Exercise 6.21
                 In turning a query into a unit vector in Figure 6.13, we assigned equal weights to each
                 of the query terms. What other principled approaches are plausible?

                 Exercise 6.22
                 Consider the case of a query term that is not in the set of M indexed terms; thus our
                                                                      ~ (q ) not being in the vector space
                 standard construction of the query vector results in V
                 created from the collection. How would one adapt the vector space representation to
                 handle this case?

                 Exercise 6.23
                 Refer to the tf and idf values for four terms and three documents in Exercise 6.10.
                 Compute the two top scoring documents on the query best car insurance for each of
                 the following weighing schemes: (i) nnn.atc; (ii) ntc.atc.

                 Exercise 6.24
                 Suppose that the word coyote does not occur in the collection used in Exercises 6.10
                 and 6.23. How would one compute ntc.atc scores for the query coyote insurance?




 Online edition (c) 2009 Cambridge UP
            6.5 References and further reading                                         133


      6.5   References and further reading
            Chapter 7 develops the computational aspects of vector space scoring. Luhn
            (1957; 1958) describes some of the earliest reported applications of term weight-
            ing. His paper dwells on the importance of medium frequency terms (terms
            that are neither too commonplace nor too rare) and may be thought of as an-
            ticipating tf-idf and related weighting schemes. Spärck Jones (1972) builds
            on this intuition through detailed experiments showing the use of inverse
            document frequency in term weighting. A series of extensions and theoret-
            ical justifications of idf are due to Salton and Buckley (1987) Robertson and
            Jones (1976), Croft and Harper (1979) and Papineni (2001). Robertson main-
            tains a web page (http://www.soi.city.ac.uk/˜ser/idf.html) containing the history
            of idf, including soft copies of early papers that predated electronic versions
            of journal article. Singhal et al. (1996a) develop pivoted document length
            normalization. Probabilistic language models (Chapter 11) develop weight-
            ing techniques that are more nuanced than tf-idf; the reader will find this
            development in Section 11.4.3.
               We observed that by assigning a weight for each term in a document, a
            document may be viewed as a vector of term weights, one for each term in
            the collection. The SMART information retrieval system at Cornell (Salton
            1971b) due to Salton and colleagues was perhaps the first to view a doc-
            ument as a vector of weights. The basic computation of cosine scores as
            described in Section 6.3.3 is due to Zobel and Moffat (2006). The two query
            evaluation strategies term-at-a-time and document-at-a-time are discussed
            by Turtle and Flood (1995).
               The SMART notation for tf-idf term weighting schemes in Figure 6.15 is
            presented in (Salton and Buckley 1988, Singhal et al. 1995; 1996b). Not all
            versions of the notation are consistent; we most closely follow (Singhal et al.
            1996b). A more detailed and exhaustive notation was developed in Moffat
            and Zobel (1998), considering a larger palette of schemes for term and doc-
            ument frequency weighting. Beyond the notation, Moffat and Zobel (1998)
            sought to set up a space of feasible weighting functions through which hill-
            climbing approaches could be used to begin with weighting schemes that
            performed well, then make local improvements to identify the best combi-
            nations. However, they report that such hill-climbing methods failed to lead
            to any conclusions on the best weighting schemes.




Online edition (c) 2009 Cambridge UP
